The current interest for women’s access credit in the development field, from the angle of financial exclusion or credit rationing, contrasts with the marginal attention granted to the other face of the coin, debt. Little is known about women’s indebtedness, especially due to a lack of systematic sex-disaggregated data. Innovative data from household survey and Financial Diaries, collected in Tamil Nadu, South India, show here that despite their restricted access to property and meagre incomes, poor women often are actively involved in credit relations, prominently via informal transactions aside microcredit, and tend to be much more deeply indebted than men relatively their incomes. Taking into account women’s financial practices can radically alter the picture of their contribution to household reproduction suggested by their incomes. They get into debt by large, and more so than men, to ensure daily survival – but also to repay debts, whose management appears frequently as a female responsibility. Debt is in the Tamil context structured by gender (alongside caste and class) as a system of distribution of entitlements and responsibilities, but also as a system of meaning. This affects how, why and by whom debts are contracted, how they are repaid, and at which costs. These results are replaced into a broader perspective interrogating their peculiarities, via a detour through the European past: in early modern France and England, and in Victorian and Edwardian England. These literature reviews highlight in particular how social reproduction has historically been sustained by specific forms of debt, part of which – and sometimes most of which – contracted by women.
This PhD explores the characteristics of the labor market in rural areas of South India over the last decade through the use of interpersonal networks. It is divided into five chapters and takes a multidisciplinary approach that draws on institutional economics, economic sociology and economic anthropology. It is based on a mixed methodology that combines quantitative and qualitative data. The former consists of longitudinal RUME-NEEMSIS data (2010-2021) collected from 600 households in ten villages. The latter is the result of several months of ethnographic fieldwork conducted using the quantified narratives method. The first chapter presents the methodological and conceptual framework, reviewing ten years of transformations in Tamil villages. The second chapter examines social capital endowments using the network modules of the NEEMSIS surveys, based on factorial analysis and network analysis. The third chapter tests the hypothesis of labor market segmentation using an expanded Mincer equation with network variables and a Finite Mixture Model (FMM). The fourth chapter demonstrates the omnipresence and diversity of intermediaries in regulating the daily work of the lower castes, based on three networks providing access to employment. The ideal-typical figure of the maistry is eroding, but that of the broker is taking root in the face of social segregation. The last chapter examines these intermediaries from the perspective of caste-related power relations that are reproduced in the labor process. Are they agents of coercion or protection for workers?
This dissertation examines gender inequalities in rural India, where, despite significant progress in recent decades, these disparities remain widespread. The study has two main objectives: first, to analyze the role of determinants that contribute to the persistence of gender inequalities, and second, to identify the factors that could support Indian society in moving toward greater gender equality. To meet these objectives, the first two chapters explore the impact of climate change and financial decision-making power on gender disparities in the labor market and indebtedness. The following chapters focus on sustainable approaches to reducing gender inequality. Chapter three emphasizes adolescence as a pivotal period for challenging deeply rooted sexist social norms, thereby fostering the intergenerational transmission of more egalitarian values. The fourth and final chapter investigates the role of community factors in the recent advancements toward reducing gender disparities in education. Overall, this research provides valuable insights into the contemporary drivers of gender inequality and the individual and community-level interventions required for Indian society to progress toward gender equality.
This dissertation examines the role that cognitive and non-cognitive skills play in developing countries along three axes: measurement of these skills, wage returns to them, and as determinants of levels of trust. The first chapter uses panel data from two cohorts of a skills training program in Mozambique to contrast two types of skill measurement: self-assessments and observational exercises. The chapter shows that self-assessments capture underlying traits, while observational exercises are better suited for program evaluations. The second chapter is based on a novel matched employer-employee data set representing the formal sector in Bangladesh and provides evidence of both the relative importance of cognitive and non-cognitive skills in this part of the labor market and the interplay between skills and hiring channels in determining wages. Results demonstrate positive returns to non-cognitive skills, varying by hiring channel. This chapter also offers suggestive evidence that employers might use hiring channels differently, depending on which skills they deem important. The third chapter makes use of the demonetization policy of November 2016 in India and a newly collected data set to causally identify the determinants of trust in a rural setting, controlling for a variety of individual characteristics, such as non-cognitive skills and cognitive ability, that could influence network formation and trust. We find that social interactions determine trust, though this result holds only among men and varies along the lines of caste membership.
This thesis examines various aspects of household indebtedness in a rural area of Tamil Nadu, South India. The main objective is twofold. The first is to analyse the effect of household financial vulnerability on labour supply, with particular attention to the measurement of financial vulnerability. The second is to analyse indebtedness at the individual level to apply a behavioural analytical framework by studying the correlation between personality traits, cognitive skills, and indebtedness. This objective is pursued through five essays in development economics. The first chapter provides background on India and presents the first-hand NEEMSIS panel data used throughout this thesis. The second chapter aims to advance research in development microeconomics by proposing a new measure of household financial vulnerability, called the financial vulnerability index, and presenting its main determinants over the decade 2010-2020. The third chapter assesses the effect of financial vulnerability (measured by the financial vulnerability index developed earlier) on household labour supply. The fourth and fifth chapters are devoted to individual behaviour. After detailing the measurement of personality traits using the Big Five taxonomy, the fourth chapter empirically tests the hypothesis of the temporal stability of these traits. Building on the results of the previous chapter, the fifth chapter analyses the contribution of personality traits and cognitive skills to debt use, negotiation, and management.
The multiple economic, political and social changes that occurred in India since the liberalizationprocess initiated in the 1980’s altered the organization and the structure of labour. These structuralchanges reshaped migratory practices depending on workforce demand. This dissertation examineshow the labour market structuration in India has contributed to changing internal migration flows andhow migratory practices evolved. Therefore, to identify the links between labour markets andmigration flows, this study combines macro and micro levels of analysis. The dissertation is organizedas follows. The literature review synthetizes migration theories. Then, in the first part, we propose amacroeconomic analysis of the links between labour market and migration. Through a labour markettypology elaborated for different regions of India, we spatialize migration flows. In the second part,with a microeconomic focus and a mixed approach that combines both qualitative results from ourfieldwork conducted between 2010 and 2014 and quantitative results, we study the evolutions oflabour migration in rural Tamil Nadu. We identify migration patterns and establish the existence of adiversity of migratory practices.
